#Interactive Tangles

We've already mentioned that the major feature of Marmion, as distinct from Athena and Arachne as a team, is unraveling. That is, taking changes to the weave and incorporating them back into the tangle. This only gets tricky if major refactors happen in the weave, which is the wrong use of the tool. If Marmion chokes, good luck and my blessings on getting it all consistent again.

There's a second possibility, of course, which is tangles which feed back into the source. A good early candidate would be [Task Lists](https://github.com/blog/1375-task-lists-in-gfm-issues-pulls-comments) as implemented by Github. Check the box, the X shows up in your source code. 

- [ ] Task Lists - do not work outside of issues etc. Boo.

It's trivial, but building the back channel is not. Something like Firebase could bootstrap it, but is insufficiently general for production use. Marmion (any feedback from tangle or weave into source is Marmion's doing) could check out Firebase and see if there are any action items, but we'd like something more durable and less API specific. Marmion shouldn't have to be running to complete the circuit.

If GitHub wants to help develop Marmion, this would surely be a valuable add. For philosophical reasons I'd like Marmion to be a whole package, not a tantalizingly close to whole package with some critical functions built into a web service. 

The usual philosophical reason for this is some noble notion of code sharing making the world a better place. Mine is like that with a hefty streak of world dominion.

We're probably talking about some helpful daemon one can install and handshake from anywhere. When one fires off something in the Marmion toolchain, it validates against any backwards propagated information from tangle or weave edits and kicks off accordingly.

The reason Marmion does it, rather than some fourth tool in the package, is that a very useful tangle would let one edit the code in-place, thus making unraveling an act that could happen at source or weave levels. I'm currently writing this in a pretty good editor that runs on top of Github, with a pretty good preview mode. Security prohibits adding more JavaScript to the mix, but my localhost comes with no such limitations. Conceivably, the source files per se, much like the weave, would be largely generated by the tangle. 

